major efforts to discredit dr. King 1965
through 1968 one attempts to discredit
dr. King with churches on February 1st
1965 the domestic intelligence division
learned that dr. King was scheduled to
speak at the Davenport Iowa Catholic
interracial counsels banquet and receive
a pacem in Terris award in memory of
Pope John internal security section
chief Frederick Baumgartner observed it
is shocking indeed that King continues
to be honored by religious groups Tom
Gardner recommended that Assistant
Director Malone contact Francis Cardinal
Spellman and suggested that in the end
it might well be embarrassing to the
Catholic Church for having given honors
to King the director noted on the
memorandum I see no need to further
approach Spellman he was apparently
alluding to the unsuccessful attempt to
sabotage dr. King's audience with the
Pope through Spellman's intervention
there is no record of any further action
in February 1966 dr. King held a press
conference following a meeting with the
Reverend John P Cody Archbishop of the
Chicago diocese of the Roman Catholic
Church and announced that he and Cody
were in agreement on general civil
rights goals and that he hoped priests
and nuns in Chicago would participate in
SCLC programs the domestic intelligence
division subsequently recommended that a
special agent acquainted with the
archbishop briefed him about dr. King to
aid the archbishop in determining the
degree of cooperation his Archdiocese
will extend to King's program in Chicago
and to result in a lessening of King's
influence in Chicago the archbishop was
briefed on February 24th 1966 along the
lines discussed with assistant director
Sullivan the agent who conducted the
briefing wrote that he felt certain that
Cody will do everything
to neutralize Kings effect in this area
in April 1966 the FBI legal attache in
Paris requested permission to inform the
pastor of the American church in Paris
of dr. King's background in an effort to
convince him that his continued support
of Martin Luther King may result in
embarrassment for him and the American
Church in Paris the pastor was briefed
on May 9th 1966 according to the agent
who conducted the briefing the pastor
was skeptical about the FBI allegations
but promised to keep the information in
mind for future dealings with dr. King
to attempt to discredit dr. King with
heads of government agencies in March
1965 the FBI contacted former Florida
governor
Leroy Collins Collins was then director
of the community relations service
department of Commerce a position the
bureau viewed as something of a mediator
in problems relating to the racial field
the FBI told Collins that Coretta King
had criticized his participation in
developments in Selma Alabama and had
said that Collins was blinded by
prejudice a copy of the December 1964
monograph about dr. King was also sent
to Collins in view of his important
position relative to the racial movement
also in March 1965 the FBI learned that
the Internal Revenue Service intended to
invite dr. King as one of 19 guest
lecturers had a series of seminars on
equal employment opportunities when the
IRS requested routine name checks on the
19 individuals director Hoover approved
a domestic Intelligence Division request
to send the IRS a copy of the December
1964 monograph normal procedures were
followed in checking the other 18 people
in December 1966 domestic intelligence
director William Sullivan
that he had met with ambassador you
Alexis Johnson during a tour of the
FBI's legal attache office in Japan and
was surprised to learn that Johnson was
unaware of allegations that communists
were influencing dr. King Sullivan
recommended that Johnson be sent a copy
of the monograph about dr. King because
of his position director Hoover approved
the plan and a copy of the monograph was
sent to the FBI legal attache in Tokyo
for hand delivery to the Ambassador dr.
King publicly announced his opposition
to American involvement in the war in
Vietnam in a speech at New York's
Riverside Church on April 4th 1967 six
days later Charles Brennan of the
domestic Intelligence Division
recommended the circulation of an
undated draft of the King monograph to
the White House Vernon's memorandum
states that the revised monograph
contained allegations about communist
influence over dr. King as well as
personally derogatory allegations
director Hoover approved and copies of
the revised monograph were sent to the
White House the Secretary of State the
Secretary of Defense the director of The
Secret Service and the Attorney General
a copy was subsequently sent to the
Commandant of the Marine Corps who had
been interested in Kings activities in
the Civil Rights Movement
but recently had become quite concerned
as to whether there are any subversive
influences which have caused King to
link the civil rights movement with the
anti-vietnam war movement the domestic
intelligence division recommended that a
copy be given to the marine commandant
because it is felt would definitely be
to the benefit of the Commandant and to
the bureau in February 1968 FBI
headquarters learned that dr. King
planned a Washington Spring project for
April 1968 according to a domestic
Intelligence Division memorandum the
director suggested that the King
monograph be again revised that
memorandum noted
bringing this monograph up-to-date and
disseminating it at high level prior to
Kings Washington spring project should
serve again to remind top-level
officials in government of the wholly
disreputable character of King because
of the importance of doing a thorough
job on this we will conduct an
exhaustive field review to bring
together the most complete and
up-to-date information and to present it
in a hard-hitting manner
the revised monograph dated march 12
1968 was disseminated to the White House
the Attorney General and the heads of
various government intelligence agencies
three attempts to discredit dr. King by
using the press despite kartha de
loaches assurances to Andrew Young and
Ralph Abernathy that the FBI would never
disseminate information to the press the
bureau continued its efforts to
cultivate friendly news sources that
would be willing to release information
unfavourable to dr. King Ralph McGill
the pro Civil Rights editor of the
Atlanta Constitution was a major focus
of the bureau's attentions the bureau
apparently first furnished McGill with
derogatory information about dr. King as
part of an attempt to dissuade community
leaders in Atlanta from participating in
a banquet planned to honor dr. King upon
his return from the Nobel Prize
ceremonies after a meeting with McGill
William Sullivan reported that McGill
said that he had stopped speaking
favorably of dr. King that he had
refused to take an active part in
preparing for the banquet and that he
had even taken steps to undermine the
banquet the Guild's version of what
transpired will never be known since
McGill is deceased
according to Sullivan's memorandum
however mr. McGill told me that
following my first discussion with him a
few weeks ago he contacted a banker
friend in Atlanta who was helping to
finance the banquet to be given King
next Wednesday night the banker was
disturbed and said he would contact some
other bankers also involve
and see if support could be quietly
withdrawn
Miguel's friend and some of the bankers
did take steps to withdraw but this was
very quickly relayed to bankers in Haiti
who were on the threshold of an
important financial deal with the
Atlanta Georgia bankers they took the
position that if the Atlanta bankers did
not support the Martin Luther King party
their financial deal with these Georgia
bankers was off as a result they got
cold feet and decided to go ahead with
financing Kings party McGill told me
that a Catholic leader in Georgia an
Episcopal clergyman and a Jewish rabbi
are also quite active in support of this
party for King I told him that he might
want to explore very confidentially and
discreetly the subject matter with these
three men McGill told me that he thinks
it is too late now especially in view of
the financial interest of the Georgia
bankers in the Haiti deal to prevent the
banquet from taking place
however McGill said he would do what he
could to encourage key people to limit
their praise and support of King as much
as possible McGill also told me that he
is taking steps through a negro leader
to get key Negro leaders to unite in
opposition to King and to gradually
force him out of the civil rights
movement if at all possible
the FBI subsequently told the White
House that McGill believes that the very
best thing that could happen would be to
have King step completely out of the
civil rights movement and public life
for he feels that if this is not done
sooner or later King will be publicly
exposed mr. McGill believes that an
exposure of King will do irreparable
harm to the civil rights movement in
which he mr. McGill and others are so
interested and have worked so hard for
and likewise it will do injury to
different citizens of the country who
have been supporting King in late May
1965 a reporter from United Press
International requested the bureau for
information about dr. King for use in a
series
of articles about the civil rights
leader the special agent-in-charge in
atlanta recommended that the bureau give
the reporter both public source and
confidential information about dr. king
because the reporter is the UPI z--
authority in the south on the negro
movement and his articles carry a great
deal of influence and the si si did not
believe that he would prepare anything
flattering or favorable to king the
director approved recommendation that
the reporter be supplied with a public
source document and with a short
summation of allegations concerning
communist influence over dr. King to be
used merely for orientation purposes in
October 1966 the domestic intelligence
division recommended that an article in
dieting King for his failure to take a
stand on the black power issue and at
the same time exposing the degree of
communist influence on him
be given to a newspaper contact friendly
to the bureau such as the editor of US
News and World Report it is felt that
the public should again be reminded of
this communist influence on King and the
current controversy among civil rights
leaders makes this timely to do so
attached to the memorandum was a
proposed article which noted that the
efforts of several civil rights leaders
to denounce black power had been
undermined by one man in the civil
rights movement who holds in his hands
the power to silence the rabble rousers
and to give the movement renewed
momentum the article attributed dr.
King's equivocation to his advisers who
were alleged to have had affiliations
with the Communist Party or
organizations associated with the party
dr. King's decision to oppose the
Vietnamese war was also attributed to
these advisers one project involving the
mass media which the FBI felt had been
particularly successful was its attempt
to prevent dr. King from obtaining
contributions from James Hoffa of the
Teamsters Union in October 1966
the FBI discovered that dr. King planned
to meet with Hoffa
but that dr. King had wanted to avoid
publicity
because in the words of the bureau
disclosure of Kings transparent attempt
to blackmail Hoffa with the large Negro
membership of hafez Union to solve the
southern christian leadership
conferences financial problems would
cause an uproar among leaders of
organizations having large Negro
memberships pointing out their own
vulnerability to such a squeeze by any
unscrupulous civil rights leader this
potential collusion between large labor
unions and the civil rights movement
could also react to the detriment of the
negro in that through large financial
donations an unscrupulous labor leader
could subvert the legitimate claims and
objectives of the civil rights movement
to his own purposes the Crime Records
division prepared an article for public
release raising the question of who
really gets squeezed when these two
pythons get together the domestic
intelligence division also recommended a
bureau official be designated now to
alert friendly news media of the meeting
once the meeting date is learned so that
arrangements can be made for appropriate
press coverage of the planned meeting to
expose and disrupt it
director Hoover's OK appears below that
recommendation on discovering that the
meeting was about to occur the crime
Records Division notified a reporter for
the New York Daily News and a national
columnist news photographers and wire
services are also being alerted to give
coverage a crime Records Division
memorandum on the following day reported
that in view of publicity in the New
York Daily News regarding this proposed
meeting King and his aides had decided
that it would be unwise to meet with
Hoffa the bureau then notified reporters
that dr. King was coming to Washington
DC the reporters cornered dr. King as he
came off the plane and quizzed him about
the proposed meeting the crime Records
Division reported these events to the
director with the
that our counterintelligence aim to
thwart King from receiving money from
the Teamsters has been quite successful
to date director Hoover initialed the
memorandum reporting this news excellent
in March 1967 director Hoover approved a
recommendation by the domestic
intelligence division to furnish
friendly reporters questions to ask dr.
King the Intelligence Division believed
that dr. King would be particularly
vulnerable to questions concerning his
opposition to the war in Vietnam and
recommended that a reporter be selected
to interview dr. King ostensibly to
question King about his new book but
with the objective of bringing out the
foreign policy aspects of dr. King's
philosophy this could then be linked to
show that King's current policies
remarkably parallel communist efforts
this would cause extreme embarrassment
to King in October 1967 the domestic
Intelligence Division recommended that
an editorial in a Negro magazine which
criticized dr. King for his stance on
the Vietnam War be given to friendly
news sources the purpose of the
dissemination was to publicize King as a
traitor to his country and his race and
to reduce his income from a series of
shows given by Harry Belafonte to earn
funds for the SCLC the recommendation
was approved by the director and is
marked handled ten 2867 four attempts to
discredit dr. King with major political
and financial leaders in March 1965 the
FBI learned that a Martin Luther King
Day was being planned in a major city
the domestic Intelligence Division
recommended that the special agent in
charge personally meet with the governor
and briefed him concerning King in order
to induce him to minimize the affair and
especially the award for King the
domestic Intelligence Division
memorandum was initialed by the director
and bears the hand
notation handled three 565 WCS Sullivan
in October 1966 the FBI learned that dr.
King had met with McGeorge Bundy then
director of the Ford Foundation and
received a tentative offer of a grant
for the SCLC the domestic intelligence
division decided that officials of the
foundation might not be aware of the
subversive backgrounds of Kings
principal advisors but that if they were
briefed this might preclude any
assistance being granted director Hoover
approved a plan to have a former FBI
agent who was then a vice president of
the Ford Motor Company approached Bundy
the ex agent was contacted briefed on
dr. King and according to deloach stated
he would personally contact Bundy in an
effort to put a stop to King receiving
any funds from the Ford Foundation in a
memorandum dated October 26th 1966
hello to reported that the X agent had
contacted Bundy but that Bundy had
refused to talk with him about dr. King
saying that he would only talk with a
person having first-hand knowledge about
dr. King and would not listen to rumors
DeLoach recommended that the FBI not
directly approach Bundy since it is
doubtful that contact with him by the
FBI will convince him one way or another
director Hoover wrote on de loaches
memorandum yes we would get nowhere with
Bundy five attempts to discredit dr.
King with congressional leaders
according to a memorandum by assistant
to the director Deloatch Speaker of the
House John McCormick requested a
briefing about dr. King's background and
activities in August 1965 Deloatch
reported that he briefed McCormick for
45 minutes about dr. King's private life
and about possible communist influence
over dr. King according to Deloatch
McCormick stated that he now recognized
the gravity of the situation and that
something obviously must be done about
it
McCormick was not interviewed by the
committee staff not all congressional
inquiries about dr. King however were
answered by the bureau for example in
January 1968 Deloatch reported that he
had met with Senator Robert C bird at
the Senators request DeLoach his
memorandum of the meeting states that
the senator expressed concern over dr.
King's plan for demonstrations in
Washington DC during the summer and said
that it was time dr. King met his
Waterloo DeLoach his memorandum states
that Senator Byrd asked if the FBI would
prepare a speech about dr. King which he
could deliver on the floor of the Senate
deloach declined to provide any
information that was not on the public
record although he did promise to keep
the senator informed of new public
source items the committee staff did not
interview senator Byrd B COINTELPRO
operations against dr. King and his
associates the FBI elevated its
activities against dr. King and his
associates to the status of formal
counterintelligence programs COINTELPRO
during this period in July 1966 the
director instructed the New York field
office that immediate steps should be
taken to discredit expose or otherwise
neutralize adviser A's role as a
clandestine communist an agent was
assigned a full time to carefully review
the advisor a case file
seeking possible counterintelligence
approaches he reported that there was no
derogatory information on adviser a's
personal life and that the only
effective way to neutralize him is by
public exposure of his alleged communist
party associations none of the FBI's
efforts against adviser a appear to have
met success
the FBI considered initiating a formal
COINTELPRO to discredit dr. King and dr.
Benjamin Spock in May 1967 when rumors
developed concerning the possibility
and Spock might run as peace candidates
in the 1968 presidential election the
New York field office recommended
postponing the effort to expose
communist connections of persons
associated with King and Spock until
they had formally announced their
candidacy the Chicago field office
proposed waiting until the summer of
1967 reasoning that by then the
administration would have either
resolved of the Vietnam conflict or if
not the Communist Party would be
emphasizing the peace theme and exposure
of Communist Party links with the King
Spock campaign would doubtlessly be
appreciated by the administration while
the Chicago field office felt that the
Bureau should not rule out the use of
flyers leaflets cards and bumper
stickers to discredit the King Spock
ticket it recommended the use of a
political columnist or reporter for this
purpose apparently no steps were taken
to implement the plan in August 1967 the
bureau initiated a COINTELPRO captioned
black nationalist hate groups this
program is extensively described in the
staff report on COINTELPRO they document
initiating the program states the
purpose of this new counterintelligence
endeavor is to expose disrupt misdirect
discredit or otherwise neutralize the
activities of black nationalist hate
type organizations and groupings their
leadership spokesmen membership and
supporters and to counter their
propensity for violence and civil
disorder intensified attention under
this program should be afforded to the
activities of such groups as the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee
Southern Christian Leadership Conference
revolutionary action movement the
Deacons for defense and justice Congress
of racial equality and the Nation of
Islam emphasis added the domestic
intelligence division expanded the black
nationalist hate groups COINTELPRO
in February 1968 the instructions to the
field offices listed as a goal prevent
the rise of a messiah who could unify
and electrify the militant black
nationalist movement Malcolm X might
have been such a messiah he is the
martyr of the movement today Martin
Luther King Stokely Carmichael and
Elijah Muhammad all aspire to this
position
Elijah Muhammad is less of a threat
because of his age king could be a real
contender for this position should he
abandon his supposed obedience to white
liberal doctrines non-violence and
embrace black nationalism the SCLC
was retained as a primary target of the
COINTELPRO and Martin Luther King's name
was added to the list of persons who
were targets the supervisor of the black
nationalist COINTELPRO told the
committee that he could recall no
counterintelligence activities directed
against the SCLC but that several were
taken against dr. King see the FBI's
efforts to discredit dr. King during his
last months between 1965 and early 1967
the files indicate the bureau concern
about dr. King had decreased this
concern was revived by dr. King's April
4th 1967 speech at New York's Riverside
Church in which he opposed the
administration's position in Vietnam the
FBI
interpreted this position as proof he
has been influenced by communist
advisors and noted that Kings remarks
were a direct parallel of the Communists
position on Vietnam a week after the
speech the FBI sent the White House and
the Justice Department a revised edition
of the printed King monograph in early
December 1967 dr. King announced plans
to hold demonstrations in major American
cities including Washington DC to spur
Congress into an act
civil rights legislation the FBI
followed closely developments in dr.
king's Washington spring project
forwarding to the White House
information concerning advisor A's
fundraising activities and dr. King's
plans to tape a lecture series for a
foreign television system allegedly to
raise funds for the project in February
1968 the FBI again revised the king
monograph and distributed it to certain
officials in the executive branch the
domestic Intelligence Division
memorandum recommending the new
monograph stated that its dissemination
prior to King's Washington spring
project should serve again to remind
top-level officials and government of
the wholly disreputable character of
King in early march the bureau broadened
its black nationalist hate groups
COINTELPRO explicitly to include dr.
King toward the end of the month the FBI
began to disseminate information to the
press designed to curtail success of
Martin Luther King's fundraising
campaign for the Washington spring
project the first of many plans included
circulating a story that King does not
need contributions from the 70,000
people he solicited since the churches
have offered support no more money is
needed and any contributed would only be
used by King for other purposes this
item would need nationwide circulation
in order to reach all the potential
contributors and curtail their donations
on march 25th the bureau approved a plan
to mail an anonymous letter to a civil
rights leader in selma alabama who was
miffed with dr. King and a copy of that
letter to a selma newspaper hoping that
the newspaper might interview the leader
about its contents the bureau described
it the purpose of the letter as calling
to the attention of the civil rights
leader that King is merely using the
Negroes of the selma area for his own
personal aggrandizement that he is not
genuinely interested in their welfare
but only in their donations that in all
probability the end
vigils going to Washington for the
spring project we'll be left stranded
without suitable housing or food the
letter should also play up the
possibility of violence there is no
indication in FBI files that the letter
was mailed during the latter part of
March dr. King went to Memphis Tennessee
where a strike by sanitation workers had
erupted into violent riots a march 28
1968 domestic Intelligence Division
memorandum stated a sanitation strike
has been going on in Memphis for some
time Martin Luther King jr. today led a
march composed of 5000 to 6000 people
through the streets of Memphis King was
in an automobile preceding the marchers
as the March developed acts of violence
and vandalism broke out including the
breaking of windows in stores and some
looting this clearly demonstrates that
acts of so-called non-violence advocated
by King cannot be controlled the same
thing could happen in his planned
massive civil disobedience for
Washington in April action attached is a
blind memorandum pointing out the above
which if you approve should be made
available by Crime Records Division to
cooperative news media sources the
memorandum carried dr. Hoover's okay and
the notation handled on 3/28
68 on March 29th 1968 the domestic
Intelligence Division recommended that
the following article be furnished to a
cooperative news source Martin Luther
King during the sanitation workers
strike and Memphis Tennessee has urged
Negroes to boycott downtown white
merchants to achieve Negro demands on
3:29 68 King led a March for the
sanitation workers like Judas leading
lambs to slaughter King led the marchers
to violence and when the violence broke
out King disappeared the fine hotel
Lorraine in Memphis is owned and
patronized exclusively by Negroes but
King didn't go there for his hasty exit
instead king decided the plush Holiday
Inn Motel white-owned
operated and almost exclusively
patronized was the place to cool it
there will be no boycott of white
merchants for King only for his
followers on April 4th dr. King returned
to Memphis
this time he registered at the Lorraine
hotel we have discovered it no evidence
that the FBI was responsible for dr.
King's move to the Lorraine hotel Dee
attempts to discredit dr. King's
reputation after his death the FBI's
attempts to discredit dr. King did not
end with his death in March 1969 the
bureau was informed that Congress was
considering declaring dr. King's
birthday a national holiday and that
members of the House Committee on
internal security might be contacting
the bureau for a briefing about dr. King
the crime Records Division recommended
briefing the congressman because they
were in a position to keep the bill from
being reported out of committee if they
realize King was a scoundrel DeLoach
noted this is a delicate matter but can
be handled very cautiously director
Hoover wrote I agree it must be handled
very cautiously in April 1969 FBI
headquarters received a recommendation
for a counterintelligence program from
the Atlanta field office the nature of
the proposed program has not been
revealed to the committee a memorandum
concerning the plan which the bureau has
given to the committee however notes
that the plan might be used in the event
the bureau is inclined to entertain
counterintelligence action against
Coretta Scott King and or the continuous
projection of the public image of Martin
Luther King the director informed the
Atlanta office that the bureau does not
desire counterintelligence action
against Coretta King of the nature you
suggest at this time conclusion although
it is impossible to gauge the full
extent to which the FBI is discrediting
programs affected the civil
movement the fact that there was impact
is unquestionable rumors circulated by
the FBI had a profound impact on the
SCLC's ability to raise funds according
to congressman Andrew Young a personal
friend and associate of dr. King the
FBI's effort against dr. King and the
SCLC chilled contributions there were
direct attempts at some of our larger
contributors who told us that they had
been told by agents that Martin had a
Swiss bank account or that Martin had
confiscated some of the monies from the
march on Washington for his personal use
none of that was true
Harry Wachtel one of dr. King's legal
counsels who handled many of the
financial and fundraising activities of
the SCLC emphasized that the SCLC was
always in need of funds getting a grant
or getting a contribution is a very
fragile thing
a grant delayed has a very serious
impact on an organization whose
financial condition was pretty rough
Wachtel testified that the SCLC
continually had to overcome rumors of
poor financial management and communist
connections the material stayed in the
political bloodstream all the way
through to the time of dr. King's death
and even after in our efforts to build a
King Center it was around it was like a
contamination the SCLC leadership
assumed that anything said in meetings
or over the telephone would be
intercepted by wiretap bugs or
informants ironically the FBI memorandum
reporting that a wiretap of the SCLC s
Atlanta office was feasible stated in
the past when interviews have been
conducted in the office of Southern
Christian Leadership Conference certain
employees when asked a question and a
half joking manner and a half serious
manner replied you should know that
already don't you have our wires tapped
it is noted in the past state of Georgia
has conducted investigations regarding
subject and Southern Christian
Leadership Conference Harry
Wachtel commented on the impact constant
surveillance on members of the SCLC when
you live in a fishbowl you act like
you're in a fishbowl whether you do it
consciously or unconsciously I can't put
specifics before you except to say that
it beggars the imagination not to
believe that the SCLC dr. King and all
its leaders were not chilled or
inhibited from all kinds of activities
political and even social Wachtel also
pointed out the ramifications stemming
from the government's advanced knowledge
of what civil rights leaders were
thinking it is like political
intelligence it did not chill us from
saying it but it affected the strategies
and tactics because the people you are
having strategies and tactics about or
privy to what you were about they knew
your doubts take events like strategies
in Atlantic City decision-making
concerning which way to go joining one
challenge or not supporting a particular
situation or not had to be limited very
strongly by the fact that information
which was expressed by telephone or
which could even possibly be picked up
by bugging would be in the hands of the
President perhaps most difficult to
gauge is the personal impact of the
bureau's programs congressman young told
the committee that while dr. King was
not deterred by the attacks which are
now known to have been instigated in
part by the FBI there is no question but
that he was personally affected it was a
great burden to be attacked by people he
respected particularly when the attacks
engendered by the FBI came from people
like Ralph McGill he sat down and cried
at the New York Times editorial about
his statement on Vietnam but this just
made him more determined it was a great
personal suffering but since we don't
really know all that they did we have no
way of knowing the ways that they
affected us